
# Superelastic SMA constitutive model (Brinson)

This repo presents a constitutive model for Super elastic Shape memory alloys. This repository has directly been used in [my article] (https://doi.org/10.1177/107754632412). I would much appreciate any citations of my work in your papers if you have used this repo in your project.

Now that you are here, you probably know what are SMAs, so i will introduce them briefely. 

Shape memory alloys are spacial kind of material that have two unique properties: 
1) Shape memory effect: This effect causes the material to recover plastic deformations after its heated to a certain temprature
2) Superelasticity(AKA Pseudoelasticity): This effect helps SMA to recover straits up to 8% without any need for external force or temprature change. But note that for this effect to take place, the alloy has to have Austenite in it's structure.

Many constitutive models have been developed to model these two unique effects. In this repo, we have used Brinson's (1993) constitutive equation to model a shape memory alloy spring. This model can also be used for wires as well with some updates that will be pointed out later on. 

This model also supports the use of the inner loops of the SMA spring/wire. But note that this model only support Superelasticity. We developed the initial model on python and Matlab language but the matlab code outperformed the spring by a large span. So I further developed the model on matlab but if you get the algorithm use, you can easily deploy the code to other languages as well. 

# How to use the code and some Notes
To use the code, You should note some things:
1) The code is written in Matlab language. So you need to have Matlab installed on your computer to run the code.
2) Different spring and material parameters are provided in the code, change variable "X" to use different springs. These springs are referenced to literature and they also have experimetal data that are contained in the "Datas" folder. After running the code, the solutions will be compared with experimental results.
3) To run the code some inital paramerters are to be set: in this code, e0, eDot0, T0, zS0 and zT0 are for the initial strain, Direction of the strain, Temprature, Martensite ratio generated by stress (Stress induced martensite) and  Martensite ratio generated by temprature. Also note that martensite ratio in this code is referred as variable "z". It is imperative to note that Brinson's model uses a parameter called "Zita 0" which is the martensite ratio at the start of each loading cycle. We have referred to this variable as z0 through the code, instead of the beginning of the code where we defini the initial state of the materials which z0 is equal to both, martensite ratio and martensite ratio at the beginning of the loading cycle.
4) The variables verbouse, plotExperimental and timer are for the intefrace and debugging of the process. you can set them as false if you want higher speed.
5) To get the martensite ratio in transformation region, We need to solve a nonlinear equation. At the first version of this code "vpasolve" was used but it came with greate performance costs. To counter tis issue, we divide the transformation region into "n" parts and save the solution ins some vectors. The when we need to find the martensite ratio for a transformation step, we find it's value by interpolating the datas in the acquired matrix. Obviously, the greater the n's number, the higher the accuracy will be. Also when z0 changes, the matrix should be updated. The functions "martensiteRatio_CORE", "strainTableGenerator", "stressFromStrainArray" do this process. The descriptions for these functions are added as comments in the code.
6) To change the model for SMA wires, delete these two multiplications in the main loop: "* r0 / (2 * pi * N * R^2) * (3/4)" and " * 2 * pi * r0 ^ 3 / 3 / R", Also disregard All of the spring's structural parameters.
